README.md, before:

# emptty
Dead simple CLI Display Manager on TTY

![](screenshot.png)

[![Packaging status](https://repology.org/badge/vertical-allrepos/emptty.svg)](https://repology.org/project/emptty/versions)

## Configuration

#### /etc/emptty/conf
Default startup configuration. On each change it requires to restart emptty.

`TTY_NUMBER` TTY, where emptty will start.

`SWITCH_TTY` Enables switching to defined TTY number. Default is true.

`PRINT_ISSUE` Enables printing of /etc/issue in daemon mode.

`DEFAULT_USER` Preselected user, if AUTOLOGIN is enabled, this user is logged in.

`AUTOLOGIN` Enables Autologin, if DEFAULT_USER is defined. Possible values are "true" or "false". Default value is false.
__NOTE:__ to enable autologin DEFAULT_USER must be in group nopasswdlogin, otherwise user will NOT be authorized.

`AUTOLOGIN_SESSION` The default session used, if Autologin is enabled. If session is not found in list of session, it proceeds to manual selection.

`LANG` defines locale for all users. Default value is "en_US.UTF-8"

`DBUS_LAUNCH` Prepends "dbus-launch" before desktop command. Default value is true. If `.emptty` is handled as script, this config is overriden to false.

`XINITRC_LAUNCH` Starts Xorg desktop with calling "\~/.xinitrc" script, if is true, file exists and selected WM/DE is Xorg session, it overrides DBUS_LAUNCH. If `.emptty` is handled as script, this config is overriden to false.

`VERTICAL_SELECTION` Prints available WM/DE each on new line instead of printing on single line.

`LOGGING` Defines the way, how is logging handled. Possible values are "default", "appending" or "disabled". Default value is "default".

`XORG_ARGS` Arguments passed to Xorg server.

`LOGGING_FILE` Overrides path of log file. Default value is `/var/log/emptty`.
__NOTE:__ It expects existence of directories to defined logging file.

`DYNAMIC_MOTD` Allows to use /etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh script to generate custom MOTD. Possible values are "true" or "false". Default value is false.
__NOTE:__ Be sure, that /etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh has correct content and permissions (e.g. 744), the script is started as default user; in daemon mode it means `root`.

`FG_COLOR` Foreground color, available only in daemon mode. List of colors is listed below.

`BG_COLOR` Background color, available only in daemon mode. List of colors is listed below.

#### /etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh
If `DYNAMIC_MOTD` is set to `true`, this file exists and is executable for its owner, the result is printed as your own MOTD. Be very careful with this script!

#### /etc/emptty/motd
Custom file, that prints your own MOTD. Reading this file supports colors (e.g. `\x1b[31m` or `\033[32m`). Is skipped, if `DYNAMIC_MOTD` is defined and `/etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh` is executable.

#### ${HOME}/.config/emptty or ${HOME}/.emptty
Optional configuration file, that could be also handled as shell script. If is not presented, emptty shows selection of installed desktops.
Configuration file stored as `${HOME}/.config/emptty` has higher priority on loading.
See [samples](SAMPLES.md#emptty-as-config)

`ENVIRONMENT` Selects, which environment should be defined for following command. Possible values are "xorg" and "wayland", "xorg" is default.

`COMMAND` Defines command to start Desktop Environment/Window Manager. This value does not need to be defined, if .emptty file is presented as shell script (with shebang at the start and execution permissions).

`LANG` Defines locale for logged user, has higher priority than LANG from global configuration

#### /etc/emptty/custom-sessions/ or ${HOME}/.config/emptty-custom-sessions/
Optional folders for custom sessions, that could be available system-wide (in case of `/etc/emptty/custom-sessions/`) or user-specific (in case of `${HOME}/.config/emptty-custom-sessions/`), but do not have .desktop file stored on standard paths for Xorg or Wayland sessions. Expected suffix of each file is ".desktop".
See [samples](SAMPLES.md#custom-sessions)

`Name` Defines name of Desktop Environment/Window Manager.

`Exec` Defines command to start Desktop Environment/Window Manager.

`Environment` Selects, which environment should be defined for following command. Possible values are "xorg" and "wayland", "xorg" is default.

#### ${HOME}./xinitrc
If config `XINITRC_LAUNCH` is set to true, it enables possibility to use .xinitrc script. See [samples](SAMPLES.md#xinitrc)

#### Colors
Please, be aware that `LIGHT_` colors could be unavailable as background color.
<details>
  <summary>List of colors</summary>
  <ul>
	<li>BLACK</li>
	<li>RED</li>
	<li>GREEN</li>
	<li>YELLOW</li>
	<li>BLUE</li>
	<li>PURPLE</li>
	<li>CYAN</li>
	<li>WHITE</li>
	<li>LIGHT_BLACK</li>
	<li>LIGHT_RED</li>
	<li>LIGHT_GREEN</li>
	<li>LIGHT_YELLOW</li>
	<li>LIGHT_BLUE</li>
	<li>LIGHT_PURPLE</li>
	<li>LIGHT_CYAN</li>
	<li>LIGHT_WHITE</li>
 <ul>
</details>

## Logging
As it is mentioned in configuration, there are three options to handle logging of emptty. The logs contains not just logs from emptty, but also from Xorg (if used) and user's WM/DE.
Described log location could differ according configuration `LOGGING_FILE`, that is stored in `/etc/emptty/conf`.

#### default
This option provides simple solution, when current instance of `emptty` logs into `/var/log/emptty` and the previous version is stored as `/var/log/emptty.old`.

__NOTE:__ Current instance always move previous log into old file, if `emptty` crashes and is started again, previous log is in `/var/log/emptty.old`.

#### appending
This option provides functionality that logs everything into `/var/log/emptty` and does not handle log rotation by itself. It leaves the option for user to handle it himself (e.g. with logrotate).

__NOTE:__ Appending without roration could cause large log file, be sure that log file is rotated.

#### disabled
This option points all log into `/dev/null`, so no log is available.

__NOTE:__ If any issue starts to appear and you want to report it, ensure you do not use this option.

## Build & install

### Build dependencies
- go
- gcc
- pam-devel
- libx11-devel (libx11)

### Dependencies
- pam
- libx11
- xorg / xorg-server (optional)
- xauth / xorg-xauth (required for xorg)
- mcookie (required for xorg)
- wayland (optional)

---
- `make clean` to cleanup already built binary.
- `make build` to build binary with gblic and gzip man page.
- `make build-musl` to build binary with musl and gzip man page.
---
- `make install` to install binary.
- `make install-pam` to install pam module.
- `make install-pam-debian` to install pam module for Debian.
- `make install-manual` to install man page.
- `make install-all` to install binary, pam module and man page.
---
- `make install-config` to create default conf file in /etc/emptty/.
- `make install-runit` to install runit service
- `make install-openrc` to install openrc service
- `make install-systemd` to install systemd service.
- `make install-motd-gen` to create default motd-gen.sh in /etc/emptty/.
---
- `make uninstall` to remove emptty from your system
---

ArchLinux users can install `emptty` using `yay -S emptty-git` or any other AUR helper

Commit message:

Refs #25, made a split for Linux and BSD systems due to different handling of UTMP and NOPAM login.

README.md, after:

# emptty
Dead simple CLI Display Manager on TTY

![](screenshot.png)

[![Packaging status](https://repology.org/badge/vertical-allrepos/emptty.svg)](https://repology.org/project/emptty/versions)

## Configuration

#### /etc/emptty/conf
Default startup configuration. On each change it requires to restart emptty.

`TTY_NUMBER` TTY, where emptty will start.

`SWITCH_TTY` Enables switching to defined TTY number. Default is true.

`PRINT_ISSUE` Enables printing of /etc/issue in daemon mode.

`DEFAULT_USER` Preselected user, if AUTOLOGIN is enabled, this user is logged in.

`AUTOLOGIN` Enables Autologin, if DEFAULT_USER is defined. Possible values are "true" or "false". Default value is false.
__NOTE:__ to enable autologin DEFAULT_USER must be in group nopasswdlogin, otherwise user will NOT be authorized.

`AUTOLOGIN_SESSION` The default session used, if Autologin is enabled. If session is not found in list of session, it proceeds to manual selection.

`LANG` defines locale for all users. Default value is "en_US.UTF-8"

`DBUS_LAUNCH` Prepends "dbus-launch" before desktop command. Default value is true. If `.emptty` is handled as script, this config is overriden to false.

`XINITRC_LAUNCH` Starts Xorg desktop with calling "\~/.xinitrc" script, if is true, file exists and selected WM/DE is Xorg session, it overrides DBUS_LAUNCH. If `.emptty` is handled as script, this config is overriden to false.

`VERTICAL_SELECTION` Prints available WM/DE each on new line instead of printing on single line.

`LOGGING` Defines the way, how is logging handled. Possible values are "default", "appending" or "disabled". Default value is "default".

`XORG_ARGS` Arguments passed to Xorg server.

`LOGGING_FILE` Overrides path of log file. Default value is `/var/log/emptty`.
__NOTE:__ It expects existence of directories to defined logging file.

`DYNAMIC_MOTD` Allows to use /etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh script to generate custom MOTD. Possible values are "true" or "false". Default value is false.
__NOTE:__ Be sure, that /etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh has correct content and permissions (e.g. 744), the script is started as default user; in daemon mode it means `root`.

`FG_COLOR` Foreground color, available only in daemon mode. List of colors is listed below.

`BG_COLOR` Background color, available only in daemon mode. List of colors is listed below.

#### /etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh
If `DYNAMIC_MOTD` is set to `true`, this file exists and is executable for its owner, the result is printed as your own MOTD. Be very careful with this script!

#### /etc/emptty/motd
Custom file, that prints your own MOTD. Reading this file supports colors (e.g. `\x1b[31m` or `\033[32m`). Is skipped, if `DYNAMIC_MOTD` is defined and `/etc/emptty/motd-gen.sh` is executable.

#### ${HOME}/.config/emptty or ${HOME}/.emptty
Optional configuration file, that could be also handled as shell script. If is not presented, emptty shows selection of installed desktops.
Configuration file stored as `${HOME}/.config/emptty` has higher priority on loading.
See [samples](SAMPLES.md#emptty-as-config)

`ENVIRONMENT` Selects, which environment should be defined for following command. Possible values are "xorg" and "wayland", "xorg" is default.

`COMMAND` Defines command to start Desktop Environment/Window Manager. This value does not need to be defined, if .emptty file is presented as shell script (with shebang at the start and execution permissions).

`LANG` Defines locale for logged user, has higher priority than LANG from global configuration

#### /etc/emptty/custom-sessions/ or ${HOME}/.config/emptty-custom-sessions/
Optional folders for custom sessions, that could be available system-wide (in case of `/etc/emptty/custom-sessions/`) or user-specific (in case of `${HOME}/.config/emptty-custom-sessions/`), but do not have .desktop file stored on standard paths for Xorg or Wayland sessions. Expected suffix of each file is ".desktop".
See [samples](SAMPLES.md#custom-sessions)

`Name` Defines name of Desktop Environment/Window Manager.

`Exec` Defines command to start Desktop Environment/Window Manager.

`Environment` Selects, which environment should be defined for following command. Possible values are "xorg" and "wayland", "xorg" is default.

#### ${HOME}./xinitrc
If config `XINITRC_LAUNCH` is set to true, it enables possibility to use .xinitrc script. See [samples](SAMPLES.md#xinitrc)

#### Colors
Please, be aware that `LIGHT_` colors could be unavailable as background color.
<details>
  <summary>List of colors</summary>
  <ul>
	<li>BLACK</li>
	<li>RED</li>
	<li>GREEN</li>
	<li>YELLOW</li>
	<li>BLUE</li>
	<li>PURPLE</li>
	<li>CYAN</li>
	<li>WHITE</li>
	<li>LIGHT_BLACK</li>
	<li>LIGHT_RED</li>
	<li>LIGHT_GREEN</li>
	<li>LIGHT_YELLOW</li>
	<li>LIGHT_BLUE</li>
	<li>LIGHT_PURPLE</li>
	<li>LIGHT_CYAN</li>
	<li>LIGHT_WHITE</li>
 <ul>
</details>

## Logging
As it is mentioned in configuration, there are three options to handle logging of emptty. The logs contains not just logs from emptty, but also from Xorg (if used) and user's WM/DE.
Described log location could differ according configuration `LOGGING_FILE`, that is stored in `/etc/emptty/conf`.

#### default
This option provides simple solution, when current instance of `emptty` logs into `/var/log/emptty` and the previous version is stored as `/var/log/emptty.old`.

__NOTE:__ Current instance always move previous log into old file, if `emptty` crashes and is started again, previous log is in `/var/log/emptty.old`.

#### appending
This option provides functionality that logs everything into `/var/log/emptty` and does not handle log rotation by itself. It leaves the option for user to handle it himself (e.g. with logrotate).

__NOTE:__ Appending without roration could cause large log file, be sure that log file is rotated.

#### disabled
This option points all log into `/dev/null`, so no log is available.

__NOTE:__ If any issue starts to appear and you want to report it, ensure you do not use this option.

## Build & install

### Build dependencies
- go
- gcc
- pam-devel (only if `make build-nopam` or `make build-musl-nopam` are not used)
- libx11-devel (libx11)

### Dependencies
- pam (only if `make build-nopam` or `make build-musl-nopam` are not used)
- libx11
- xorg / xorg-server (optional)
- xauth / xorg-xauth (required for xorg)
- mcookie (required for xorg)
- wayland (optional)

---
- `make clean` to cleanup already built binary.
- `make build` to build binary with gblic and gzip man page.
- `make build-musl` to build binary with musl and gzip man page.
- `make build-nopam` to build binary with gblic and gzip man page without PAM dependency.
- `make build-musl` to build binary with musl and gzip man page without PAM dependency.
---
- `make install` to install binary.
- `make install-pam` to install pam module. Not required, if `nopam` version is built.
- `make install-pam-debian` to install pam module for Debian. Not required, if `nopam` version is built.
- `make install-manual` to install man page.
- `make install-all` to install binary, pam module and man page.
---
- `make install-config` to create default conf file in /etc/emptty/.
- `make install-runit` to install runit service
- `make install-openrc` to install openrc service
- `make install-systemd` to install systemd service.
- `make install-motd-gen` to create default motd-gen.sh in /etc/emptty/.
---
- `make uninstall` to remove emptty from your system
---

ArchLinux users can install `emptty` using `yay -S emptty-git` or any other AUR helper
